[core] memory monitor documentation (#29341)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-core/objects/limiting-memory-usage.rst

Limiting the memory usage
=========================

> The application may consume a large amount of heap space and causes the node to run out of memory. When that happens the operating system will start killing worker or raylet processes, which breaks Ray. It may stall the metrics and if this happens on the head node, it may stall the :ref:`dashboard <ray-dashboard>` or other control processes and causes Ray to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If application tasks or actors consume a large amount of heap space, it can cause the node to run out of memory (OOM). When that happens the operating system will start killing worker or raylet processes, disrupting the application. OOM may also stall metrics and if this happens on the head node, it may stall the :ref:`dashboard <ray-dashboard>` or other control processes and cause the cluster to become unusable.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: add toc

Memory Monitor
--------------

> The memory monitor is a component that runs on each node. It periodically checks the memory usage, which includes the worker heap, the object store, and the raylet as described in :ref:`memory management <memory>`. If the combined usage exceeds a configurable threshold the raylet will kill task or actor to free up memory and prevent Ray from failing.

Reviewer 2: add consts table definition

> The memory monitor is a component that runs on each node. It periodically checks the memory usage, which includes the worker heap, the object store, and the raylet as described in :ref:`memory management <memory>`. If the combined usage exceeds a configurable threshold the raylet will kill task or actor to free up memory and prevent Ray from failing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory monitor is a component that runs within the raylet process on each node. It periodically checks the memory usage, which includes the worker heap, the object store, and the raylet as described in :ref:`memory management <memory>`. If the combined usage exceeds a configurable threshold the raylet will kill a task or actor process to free up memory and prevent Ray from failing.
```

.. note::

    The memory monitor is in :ref:`alpha <api-stability-alpha>`. It is disabled by default and needs to be enabled by setting the environment variable ``RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms`` to a value greater than zero when Ray starts. It is available on Linux and is tested with Ray running inside a container that is using cgroup v1. If you encounter issues when running the memory monitor outside of a container or the container is using cgroup v2, please :ref:`file an issue or post a question <limiting-memory-usage-questions>`. 

Enabling the Memory Monitor
---------------------------

> Verify the memory monitor is disabled by default:

Reviewer: Not sure if we need instructions for this since it's already the default? It's probably sufficient to just give the below instructions for enabling, and then give the alternative output if it's disabled.

Which should print

.. code-block:: bash

    (raylet) memory_monitor.cc:65: MemoryMonitor disabled. Specify `memory_monitor_interval_ms` > 0 to enable the monitor.

Now enable the memory monitor:

.. code-block:: bash

    ray stop; RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms=250 ray start --head

Check the logs again to see the monitor is now running:

.. code-block:: bash

    grep memory_monitor.cc /tmp/ray/session_latest/logs/raylet.out

Which should print

.. code-block:: bash

    (raylet) memory_monitor.cc:45: MemoryMonitor initialized with usage threshold at 34664513536 bytes (0.97 system memory), total system memory bytes: 35738255360

Memory usage threshold
----------------------

The memory usage threshold is used by the memory monitor to determine when it should start killing processes to free up memory. The threshold is controlled by two environment variables ``RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction`` (default: 0.9) and ``RAY_min_memory_free_bytes`` (default: 1 GiB). When the node starts it computes the usage threshold as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    usage_threshold = max(system_memory * RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction, system_memory - RAY_min_memory_free_bytes)

> ``RAY_min_memory_free_bytes`` can be disabled by setting its value to -1. In that case it only uses ``RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction`` to determine the usage threshold. Here we set the memory threshold to be 0.9 of system memory:

Reviewer: Does 0 make more sense as the disabled value for min memory free?

Author: 0 would be equal to memory threshold = 1, which is supported

Let's move this discussion offline unless we suggest making code changes in this PR? Feel free to reopen if this should be in this PR

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: Thanks for adding these examples, but I'm not sure that it is the best use of space (should err on the side of adding fewer more concise docs if possible). Maybe you could just explain when to override which env variable?

    ray stop; RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms=250 RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction=0.9 RAY_min_memory_free_bytes=-1 ray start --head

Now fetch the raylet logs:

.. code-block:: bash

    grep memory_monitor.cc /tmp/ray/session_latest/logs/raylet.out

For a node with ~33 GiB of RAM the raylet log prints:

.. code-block:: bash

>     (raylet) memory_monitor.cc:45: MemoryMonitor initialized with usage threshold at 32164429824 bytes (0.90 system memory), total system memory bytes: 35738255360

Reviewer 2: group together?

On the other hand, if we set ``RAY_min_memory_free_bytes`` to a low value it will limit the amount of free memory reserved by the memory monitor. This helps limit the free memory for node with large amounts of RAM.

.. code-block:: bash

    ray stop; RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms=250 RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction=0.5 RAY_min_memory_free_bytes=1000000000 ray start --head

Now fetch the raylet logs again:

.. code-block:: bash

    grep memory_monitor.cc /tmp/ray/session_latest/logs/raylet.out

For a node with ~33 GiB of RAM it should have a threshold close to 32GiB by leaving only 1000000000 bytes of free memory.

.. code-block:: bash

    (raylet) memory_monitor.cc:45: MemoryMonitor initialized with usage threshold at 34738255360 bytes (0.97 system memory), total system memory bytes: 35738255360

Retry policy
------------

> When a task or actor is killed by the memory monitor it will retry using a separate retry counter called the task oom retry instead of the typical retry that is :ref:`max_retries <task-fault-tolerance>` for Tasks and :ref:`max_restarts <actor-fault-tolerance>` for Actors. The number of oom retries is shared between tasks and actors and the default number is 15. It is configured by passing the environment variable ``RAY_task_oom_retries`` when starting Ray as well as the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a task or actor is killed by the memory monitor, it will retry using a separate retry counter called the task oom retry instead of the typical retry that is :ref:`max_retries <task-fault-tolerance>` for Tasks and :ref:`max_restarts <actor-fault-tolerance>` for Actors. The number of oom retries is shared between tasks and actors and the default number is 15. It is configured by passing the environment variable ``RAY_task_oom_retries`` when starting Ray as well as the application.
```

> When a task or actor is killed by the memory monitor it will retry using a separate retry counter called the task oom retry instead of the typical retry that is :ref:`max_retries <task-fault-tolerance>` for Tasks and :ref:`max_restarts <actor-fault-tolerance>` for Actors. The number of oom retries is shared between tasks and actors and the default number is 15. It is configured by passing the environment variable ``RAY_task_oom_retries`` when starting Ray as well as the application.

Reviewer 2: also, what's the oom retry counter

Reviewer: Can you also capitalize OOM?

        raise value
    ray.exceptions.OutOfMemoryError: Task was killed due to the node running low on memory.
    Memory on the node (IP: 172.17.0.2, ID: 3a4b60759256926fd0e84a9ff596dab3d7be854134107ef21b0e0260) where the task was running was 32.53GB / 33.28GB (0.977449), which exceeds the memory usage threshold of 0.969955. Ray killed this worker (ID: 39416ad98016ee6a63173856a9b4e4100625be22e6ee4192722388ba) because it was the most recently scheduled task; to see more information about memory usage on this node, use `ray logs raylet.out -ip 172.17.0.2`. To see the logs of the worker, use `ray logs worker-39416ad98016ee6a63173856a9b4e4100625be22e6ee4192722388ba*out -ip 172.17.0.2`.
    Consider provisioning more memory on this node or reducing task parallelism by requesting more CPUs per task. To adjust the eviction threshold, set the environment variable `RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction` when starting Ray. To disable worker eviction, set the environment variable `RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms` to zero.

Verify the task was indeed executed twice via ``task_oom_retry``:

.. code-block:: bash

>     grep -r "retries left" /tmp/ray/session_latest/logs/

Reviewer 2: add $ before

    /tmp/ray/session_latest/logs/python-core-driver-01000000ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff_60002.log:[2022-10-12 16:14:07,723 I 60002 60031] task_manager.cc:458: task c8ef45ccd0112571ffffffffffffffffffffffff01000000 retries left: 3, oom retries left: 1, task failed due to oom: 1
    
    /tmp/ray/session_latest/logs/python-core-driver-01000000ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff_60002.log:[2022-10-12 16:14:18,843 I 60002 60031] task_manager.cc:458: task c8ef45ccd0112571ffffffffffffffffffffffff01000000 retries left: 3, oom retries left: 0, task failed due to oom: 1
    
    /tmp/ray/session_latest/logs/python-core-driver-01000000ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff_60002.log:[2022-10-12 16:14:18,843 I 60002 60031] task_manager.cc:466: No retries left for task c8ef45ccd0112571ffffffffffffffffffffffff01000000, not going to resubmit.

.. note::

>     task retries are executed immediately. If there is a long running process it is possible for a task to keep retrying and fail and exhaust the oom retries. Consider increasing ``RAY_task_oom_retries``, :ref:`increase num_cpus per task to reduce the parallelism <limiting-memory-usage-increase-num-cpus>`, or :ref:`estimate the memory requirement and use memory aware scheduling <limiting-memory-usage-memory-scheduling>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Task retries are executed immediately. If there is another long-running process that is hogging memory, it is possible for a task to exhaust its OOM retries. Consider increasing ``RAY_task_oom_retries``, :ref:`increasing `num_cpus` per task to reduce the parallelism <limiting-memory-usage-increase-num-cpus>`, or :ref:`estimating the memory requirement for each task and using memory-aware scheduling <limiting-memory-usage-memory-scheduling>`.
```

.. note::

>     actors by default are non-retriable since :ref:`max_restarts <actor-fault-tolerance>` defaults to 0, therefore tasks are preferred to actors when it comes to what gets killed first. Actor right now doesn't use ``RAY_task_oom_retries`` and instead uses :ref:`max_restarts <actor-fault-tolerance>` when it is killed by the memory monitor. This is to be changed very soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Actors by default are not retriable since :ref:`max_restarts <actor-fault-tolerance>` defaults to 0. Therefore tasks are preferred to actors when it comes to what gets killed first. Actors do not currently respect ``RAY_task_oom_retries`` and instead uses :ref:`max_restarts <actor-fault-tolerance>` when it is killed by the memory monitor. This is to be changed in v2.2.```

.. _limiting-memory-usage-worker-killing-policy:

Worker killing policy
---------------------

> The raylet prioritizes killing task that is retriable, i.e. when ``max_retries`` or ``max_restarts`` is > 0. This is done to minimize workload failure. It then looks for the last one submitted and kills that worker process. It selects and kills one process at a time regardless of how frequent the monitor runs as determined by ``RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The raylet prioritizes killing tasks that are retriable, i.e. when ``max_retries`` or ``max_restarts`` is > 0. This is done to minimize workload failure. It then looks for the last one submitted and kills that worker process. It selects and kills one process at a time regardless of how frequent the monitor runs as determined by ``RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms``.
```

> The raylet prioritizes killing task that is retriable, i.e. when ``max_retries`` or ``max_restarts`` is > 0. This is done to minimize workload failure. It then looks for the last one submitted and kills that worker process. It selects and kills one process at a time regardless of how frequent the monitor runs as determined by ``RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms``.

Reviewer: Last one submitted or last one to start executing?

Also, I'm not exactly sure what the last sentence means? Is it saying we kill at most one process per RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms?

> Let's first start ray and specify the memory threshold.

Reviewer: Again, not sure we need the examples here since I think the text is straightforward enough on its own. Maybe could add to the design pattern examples, though, and link to this page?

Author: For worker killing policy: add a dropdown for example

num_cpus & memory scheduling : consolidate to "addressing memory issues" section and refer to patterns page for resource scheduling

.. code-block:: bash

    ray stop; RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms=250 RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction=0.4 RAY_min_memory_free_bytes=-1 ray start --head

Let's create an application two_actors.py that submits two actors, where the first one is retriable and the second one is non-retriable.

.. literalinclude:: ../doc_code/limiting_memory_usage.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: __two_actors_start__
      :end-before: __two_actors_end__

Run the application to see that only the first actor was killed.

.. code-block:: bash

    python two_actors.py
    
    first actor was killed by memory monitor
    finished second actor

.. _limiting-memory-usage-increase-num-cpus:

> Increasing num_cpus of each task

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Increasing `num_cpus` of each task
```
add syntax highlighting for variables

First we start Ray and specify the cpu resources to be 2 cpus.

.. code-block:: bash

    ray stop; RAY_memory_monitor_interval_ms=250 RAY_memory_usage_threshold_fraction=0.4 RAY_min_memory_free_bytes=-1 ray start --head --num-cpus=2

Modify the application to request 2 cpus for each actor and rename it to num_cpus.py:

.. tabbed:: Summary of changes

    .. literalinclude:: ../doc_code/limiting_memory_usage.py
          :language: python
          :start-after: __set_num_cpus_summary_start__
          :end-before: __set_num_cpus_summary_end__

.. tabbed:: Full script

    .. literalinclude:: ../doc_code/limiting_memory_usage.py
          :language: python
          :start-after: __set_num_cpus_start__
          :end-before: __set_num_cpus_end__

Run the application to see that both actors complete successfully:

.. code-block:: bash

    python num_cpus.py
    
    finished first actor
    finished second actor

.. _limiting-memory-usage-memory-scheduling:

> Memory aware scheduling

Reviewer: I think this is duplicated with the memory design pattern that @jjyao added.
